this is one of the most amazing animals
on the face of the earth this is a tapir
now this is a baby tapir the cutest
animal offspring in the animal kingdom
by far there's no competition here I
have dedicated the past 20 years of my
life to the research and conservation of
tapirs in Brazil and it has been
absolutely amazing but at the moment
I've been thinking really really hard
about the impact of my work I've been
questioning myself about the real
contributions I have made for the
conservation of these animals I love so
much am i being effective in
safeguarding their survival am i doing
enough I guess the big question here is
am I is studying papers and contributing
to their conservation or am I just
documenting their extinction the world
is facing so many different conservation
crises we all know that it's all over
the news every day tropical forests and
other ecosystems been destroyed climate
change so many species on the brink of
extinction tigers lions elephants rhinos
tapirs this is the lowland tapir the
tapirs faeces I work with the largest
terrestrial mammal of South America
they're massive they're powerful adults
can weigh up to 300 kilos that's half
the size of a horse they're gorgeous
tapirs are mostly found in tropical
forests such as the Amazon and they
absolutely need large patches of habitat
in order to find all the resources they
need to reproduce and survive but their
habitat is being destroyed
and they have being hunted out of
several parts of their geographic
distribution and you see this is very
very unfortunate because tapirs are
extremely important for the habitats
where they're found they're herbivores
50% of their diet consists of fruit and
when they eat the fruit they swallow the
seeds which they disperse throughout the
habitat through their faeces they play
this major major role in shaping and
maintaining the structure and diversity
of the forest and for that reason capers
are known as Gardeners of the forest
isn't that amazing
if you think about it the extinction of
tapirs would seriously affect
biodiversity as a whole I started my
paper work in 1996 still very young
fresh out of college and it was a
pioneer research and conservation
program at that point we had nearly zero
information about tapers mostly because
they're so difficult to study they're
nocturnal solitary very very elusive
animals and we we got started getting
very basic data about this animals but
what is it that a conservationist does
well first we need data we need field
research we those long-term data sets to
support conservation action and I told
you tapers are very hard to study so we
have to rely on indirect methods to
study them we have to capture and
anesthetize them so that we can install
GPS collars around their necks and
follow their movements which is a
technique used by many other
conservationists around the world and
then we can gather information about how
to use space how they move through the
landscape what are their priority
habitats and so much more next we must
disseminate what we learn we have to
educate people about tapirs and how
important these animals are and it's
amazing how many people around the world
who do not know what a tapir is
in fact many people think this is a
taper let me tell you this is not a
taper this is a giant anteater papers do
not eat ants never ever and then next we
have to provide training capacity
building it is our responsibility to
prepare the conservationists of the
future we are losing several
conservation battles and we need more
people doing what we do and they need
the skills and they need the passion to
do that
ultimately we conservationists we must
be able to apply our data to apply our
accumulated knowledge to support actual
conservation action our first tapir
program took place in the Atlantic
forest in the eastern part of Brazil one
of the most vital biomes in the world
the destruction of the Atlantic forest
began in the early 1500s when the
Portuguese first arrived in Brazil
beginning the European colonization in
the eastern part of South America this
forest was almost completely cleared for
timber agriculture cattle ranching and
the construction of cities and today
only 7% of the Atlantic forest is still
left standing and tapers our founding
very very small isolated disconnected
populations in the Atlantic forest we
found out that tapers move through open
areas of pasture land and agriculture
going from one patch of forest to patch
of forest so our main approach in this
region was to use our tapir data to
identify the potential places for the
establishment of wildlife corridors in
between those patches of forests
reconnecting the habitat so that tapirs
and many other animals could cross the
landscape safely after 12 years in the
Atlantic forest in 2008 we expanded our
tapir conservation efforts to the
Pantanal in the western part of brazil
near the border with Bolivia and
Paraguay
this is the largest the largest
continuous freshwater floodplain in the
world
an incredible place and one of the most
important strongholds for lowland papers
in South America and working in the
Pantanal has been extremely refreshing
because we found large healthy tapir
populations in the area and we have been
able to study tapers and the most
natural conditions will ever find very
much free of threats in the Pantanal
besides the GPS collars were using
another technique camera traps this
camera is equipped with the with the
movement sensor it photographs animals
when they walk in front of it so thanks
to these amazing devices we have been
able to gather precious information
about tapir reproduction in social
organization which are very important
pieces of the puzzle when you're trying
to develop those conservation strategies
and now right now 2015 we're expanding
our work once again to the Brazilian
cerrado the open grasslands and shrubs
or estill the central part of Brazil
today this region is the very epicenter
of economic development in my country
where natural habitat and wildlife
populations are rapidly being eradicated
by several different threats including
once again cattle ranching large
sugarcane and soybean plantations
poaching roadkill just to name a few and
somehow tapirs are still there which
gives me a lot of hope but I have to say
that starting this new program in the
Sahad was a bit of a slap in the face
when you drive around and you find that
tapers along the highways and signs of
tapers wandering around in the middle of
sugar cane plantations where they
shouldn't be and you talk to kids and
they tell you that they know how take
your meat tastes because their families
poach and eat them it really breaks your
heart the situation in the sahara made
me realize gave me the sense of urgency
I am swimming against the tide maybe
realize that despite two decades of hard
work trying to save this animals we
still have so much work to do if we are
to prevent them from disappearing we
have to find ways to solve all these
problems we really do and you know what
we really came to a point in the
conservation world where we have to
think out of the box we'll have to be a
lot more creative than we are right now
and I told you roadkill is a big problem
for tapirs in the Suhad oh so we just
came up with the idea of putting
reflective stickers on the GPS collars
with put on the tapers these are the
same stickers used on big trucks to
avoid collision so tapers crossed the
highways after dark so the stickers will
hopefully help drivers see this shining
thing crossing the highway and maybe
they will slow down a little bit for now
this is just a crazy idea we don't know
we'll see if it will reduce the amount
of tapir roadkill but the point is maybe
this is the kind of stuff that needs to
be done and although I'm struggling with
all this questions in my mind right now
I have a packed with papers I know in my
heart the tapir conservation is my cause
this is my passion I'm not alone I have
this huge network of supporters behind
me and there's no way I'm ever going to
stop I will continue doing this most
probably for the rest of my life and
I'll keep doing this for Patricia my
namesake one of the first papers were
captured and monitored in the Atlantic
forest many many years ago for Rita and
her baby Vincent in the Pantanal and
I'll keep doing this for tad a baby
tapir we captured in December last year
also in the Pantanal and I will keep
doing this for the hundreds of papers
I've had the pleasure to meet over the
years and many others I know it will
encounter in the future
this animals deserve to be cared for
or they need me they need us and you
know we human beings deserve to live in
a world where we can get out there and
see and benefit from not only tapirs but
all the other beautiful species now and
in the future thank you so much